[](){#ref-platform-mlp}
# Machine learning platform

The Machine Learning Platform (MLP) provides compute, storage and expertise to the machine learning communities accessing the Alps Research Infrastructure.

## Getting started

<div class="grid cards" markdown>
-   :fontawesome-solid-mountain: __ML Guides__

    For an overview of how to use common machine learning software, tools and workflows, read our [machine learning documentation][ref-software-ml].

    Tutorials on how to set up and configure a machine learning environment in order to run LLM workloads such as inference, fine-tuning and multi-node training can be found in the [tutorials section][ref-tutorials-ml].

    Check out the [PyTorch documentation][ref-software-pytorch] for information about how to run PyTorch.

</div>

### Getting access

Project administrators (PIs and deputy PIs) of projects on the MLP can to invite users to join their project, before they can use the project's resources on Alps.
This is performed using the [project management tool][ref-account-waldur].

Once invited to a project, you will receive an email, which you need to create an account and configure [multi-factor authentication][ref-mfa] (MFA).

## Systems

The main cluster provided by the MLP is Clariden, a large Grace-Hopper GPU system on Alps.

<div class="grid cards" markdown>
-   :fontawesome-solid-mountain: [__Clariden__][ref-cluster-clariden]

    Clariden is the main [Grace-Hopper][ref-alps-gh200-node] cluster.
</div>

<div class="grid cards" markdown>
-   :fontawesome-solid-mountain: [__Bristen__][ref-cluster-bristen]

    Bristen is a smaller system with [A100 GPU nodes][ref-alps-a100-node] for data processing, development, x86 workloads and inference services.
</div>

[](){#ref-mlp-storage}
## File Systems and Storage

There are three main file systems mounted on the MLP clusters Clariden and Bristen.

| type |mount | filesystem |
| -- | -- | -- |
| Home | `/users/$USER` | [VAST][ref-alps-vast] |
| Scratch | `/iopsstor/scratch/cscs/$USER` | [Iopsstor][ref-alps-iopsstor] |
|         | `/capstor/scratch/cscs/$USER` | [Capstor][ref-alps-capstor] |
| Project | `/capstor/store/cscs/swissai/<project>` | [Capstor][ref-alps-capstor] |

### Home

Every user has a home path (`$HOME`) mounted at `/users/$USER` on the [VAST][ref-alps-vast] filesystem.
The home directory has 50 GB of capacity, and is intended for configuration, small software packages and scripts.

### Scratch

Scratch filesystems provide temporary storage for high-performance I/O for executing jobs.
Use scratch to store datasets that will be accessed by jobs, and for job output.
Scratch is per user - each user gets separate scratch path and quota.

* The environment variable `SCRATCH=/iopsstor/scratch/cscs/$USER` is set automatically when you log into a system of the ML platform, and can be used as a shortcut to access scratch.
* There is an additional scratch path mounted on [Capstor][ref-alps-capstor] at `/capstor/scratch/cscs/$USER`.

!!! warning "scratch cleanup policy"
    - Files on `/iopsstor/scratch/cscs/$USER` that have not been accessed in **14 days** are automatically deleted.
    - Files on `/capstor/scratch/cscs/$USER` that have not been accessed in **30 days** are automatically deleted.

    **Scratch is not intended for permanent storage**: transfer files back to the capstor project storage after job runs.

[](){#ref-mlp-storage-suitability}
!!! note "file system suitability"
    The Capstor scratch filesystem is based on HDDs and is optimized for large, sequential read and write operations.
    We recommend using Capstor for storing **checkpoint files** and other **large, contiguous outputs** generated by your training runs.
    In contrast, Iopsstor uses high-performance NVMe drives, which excel at handling **IOPS-intensive workloads** involving frequent, random access. This makes it a better choice for storing **training datasets**, especially when accessed randomly during machine learning training.
    See the [Lustre guide][ref-guides-storage-lustre] for some hints on how to get the best performance out of the filesystem.

### Scratch Usage Recommendations

Use Iopsstor scratch (`$SCRATCH`) for:

* Training and validation datasets that are read frequently and non-sequentially.
* Workloads that perform many small, random I/O operations.

Use Capstor scratch (`/capstor/scratch/cscs/$USER`) for:

* Storing model checkpoints.
* Outputs from simulations or training jobs that involve large, contiguous I/O.

After your job completes, remember to transfer any important results to your permanent project storage.

### Project

Project storage is backed up, with no cleaning policy: it provides intermediate storage space for datasets, shared code or configuration scripts that need to be accessed from different vClusters.
Project is per project - each project gets a project folder with project-specific quota.

* if you need additional storage, ask your PI to contact the CSCS service managers Fawzi or Nicholas.
* hard limits on capacity and inodes prevent users from writing to project if the quota is reached - you can check quota and available space by running the [`quota`][ref-storage-quota] command on a login node or ela 
* it is not recommended to write directly to the project path from jobs.

